Now I have a thorough picture of your entire system. Here's my analysis.
                                                                                                                                      
  ---                                                             
  Overall Architecture                                                                                                                
                                                                  
  You've built an evolutionary optimization loop where LLM agents act as the mutation operator. The structure is:                     
                                                                  
  Generate 10 strategy archetypes → Implement each into a bot copy →
  Evaluate via matches → Promote winner → Repeat

  This is a legitimate approach. The core loop is well-engineered mechanically — clean separation between strategy design and
  implementation, batch match execution, champion tracking, memory management. But there are several structural issues that limit how
  much improvement this can actually deliver.

  ---
  What Works Well

  1. Champion system (rank-variants.sh:393-410): Saving past winners and forcing new variants to beat them too is a solid
  anti-regression mechanism. This prevents oscillation where variant A beats B but loses to what B already beat.
  2. Centralized scoring formula: The scoring is well-designed — it creates a smooth gradient (kills, VP, economy all contribute)
  rather than a binary win/loss signal, which helps differentiate between variants that all lose but in different ways.
  3. Clean separation of concerns: Archetype creation (strategy) vs implementation (code) as separate agents is architecturally sound.
   It lets the strategy agent think abstractly while the implementer focuses on code correctness.
  4. Self-play dynamic: Copying the winning bot to copy_bot after each iteration means the opponent co-evolves if copy_bot is the
  target. This prevents the optimizer from overfitting to a static opponent.

  ---
  Critical Weaknesses

  1. The LLM has zero memory across iterations

  This is the most significant problem. In variant-loop.sh:214-217:

  if [[ -d "$STATE_DIR" ]]; then
      printf '%s\n' "${BLUE}Cleaning .state directory for fresh iteration...${NC}"
      rm -rf "$STATE_DIR"
  fi

  The archetype-creator sees only the current bot code. It has no knowledge of:
  - What archetypes were tried before
  - What scores they achieved
  - What strategies worked or failed
  - Which specific code changes helped or hurt

  This means the LLM is doing random search, not guided optimization. It could (and likely will) regenerate equivalent archetypes
  across iterations. A human improver learns from failures; your system doesn't.

  2. Single match per variant = extremely noisy signal

  Each variant plays exactly one game per opponent (run-all-variants.sh). Battlecode outcomes have variance — starting positions, tree
   layouts on random maps, etc. You could easily promote a worse variant that got lucky, or reject a better one that got unlucky.

  With 10 variants + original = 11 competitors and 1 game each, you're essentially flipping coins and picking the best result. You
  need at minimum 3-5 matches per pairing for any statistical confidence.

  3. Single map optimization

  All matches run on one map (default MagicWood). The winner may be hyper-specialized for that map's topology. This creates fragile
  bots that exploit one specific layout rather than robust strategies.

  4. No analysis of WHY variants win or lose

  The system records round count, kills, VP, and bullets — but never feeds back what happened in the game. A human watching a replay
  would see "this bot won because it flanked from the east" or "this one lost because it built tanks too late." The LLM gets none of
  this causal insight. It only gets "you are now the winning bot, generate 10 more ideas."

  5. No refinement of promising strategies

  When variant 7 wins, its archetype description is discarded (state wiped). The next iteration generates 10 entirely fresh
  archetypes. There's no mechanism to say "the tank rush was 80% right, try 10 refinements of it." You're always doing exploration and
   never exploitation — the opposite of what you want as the bot improves.

  6. Non-compiling variants still enter the tournament

  In variant-loop.sh:289-291:
  if ! ./gradlew compileJava -q 2>&1 | tail -5; then
      printf '%s\n' "${RED}Warning: Compilation may have issues${NC}"
  fi

  This prints a warning but doesn't skip the variant from matches. A broken variant wastes a match slot and gets a terrible score,
  which is harmless but wastes compute.

  7. Sequential variant implementation is the bottleneck

  The 10 variants are implemented one at a time in a serial loop. Each requires an LLM call + compilation check. This is likely the
  dominant wallclock cost per iteration and could be parallelized.

  ---
  Predicted Improvement Trajectory

  - Iterations 1-3: Meaningful gains. The LLM naturally generates diverse strategies, and some will be better than the starting bot.
  Low-hanging fruit gets picked.
  - Iterations 4-8: Diminishing returns. The bot reaches a local optimum. Random archetype generation struggles to beat an
  already-decent bot plus its champion history.
  - Iterations 9+: Stagnation. The same types of archetypes get regenerated. The champion gauntlet becomes increasingly hard to pass.
  Wasted compute.

  ---
  Highest-Impact Improvements (in priority order)

  1. Add memory: Pass the previous iteration's archetypes + scores + results to the archetype-creator. Even just a
  previous-results.json with "archetype X scored Y because Z" would let the LLM do hill-climbing instead of random search.
  2. Multiple matches per pairing: Run 3-5 games per variant-opponent pair. Average the scores. This dramatically reduces promotion
  noise.
  3. Refinement mode: When a variant wins convincingly, generate the next iteration's archetypes as "10 variations on the winning
  strategy" rather than 10 completely fresh ideas.
  4. Multi-map evaluation: Run on 2-3 different maps and aggregate. Prevents map-specific overfitting.
  5. Match replay analysis: Extract key events from the match database (when did units die, what was the economy curve, when did the
  decisive engagement happen) and feed that back to the archetype creator as context.

  ---
  Bottom Line

  The mechanical infrastructure is solid. The problem is that without memory and feedback, this is random search wearing an
  evolutionary algorithm's clothes. The LLM's role is reduced to "generate plausible-sounding strategies" rather than "learn from what
   worked and iterate." You'll see fast early gains that plateau quickly.

  The single highest-ROI change: persist archetype descriptions + their scores across iterations and feed them to the
  archetype-creator. That alone transforms this from random search into something closer to actual optimization.